
CodeBook for run_analysis.R

The data are taken from (hearinafter "authors"): 
Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. 
Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. 
International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012. 
  
According to the authors, the raw data consists of times series recordings of:
30 users conducting 6 activities: Walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing and lying.
The users were instrumented with Samsung Galaxy 2's. The signals from the 3-axis linear acceleration and 3-axis gyro's (angular velocity) were recorded at a constant rate of 50Hz.
The 6 sensor signals were pre-processed by a noise filter (type and poles not specified) and then sampled into 2.56 sec / 50% overlap windows, creating 128 point “processed data windows”. 
The pre-processed data was low-pass filtered (0.3 Hz Butterworth, number of poles not specified). The passed signal (low frequency component) was assigned to a "Gravity" component.
This gravity signal was subracted from the total signal to produce a "Body" signal. This process was done to remove gravity induced sensor bias and offset.  
The resulting 12 processed signals (6 Body and 6 gravity) were then further processed to obtain a set of gross "features" (e.g. mean body acceleration for X, Y, Z axis). 
This further prcessing was done in both time- and frequency-domains. There are a total of 561 such "features" (semi-descriptive names are provided by the authors).

The authors feature data is of the form [subject = 1,30 : activity = 1,6 : record = 1,n : feature = 1,561] 
Each subject completed all activities. For each subject_activity there are at least 1 and up to n records.
The authors give a full set of feature values for each subject_activity_record. 

run_anlysis.R produces:
An internal tidy set (df) of the form [subject = 1,30 : activity = 1,6 : record = 1,n : select_features = 1,36] 
An output tidy set (f) of the form [subject = 1,30 : activity = 1,6 : select_features = 1,36]
  where the results are averaged over all record = 1,n 

Select_features to be included in the Tidy data set:
The frequency domain features as reported are ignored. 
The authors have not detailed how the f-domain processing was done.
The results are all believed of questionable value because: 
  1) they likely remain strongly biased by the transfer function of the individual sensors.
  2) f-domain characteristics should have been taken on the full data sets (not on windows) with an applied cosine taper. 
  3) the “stationarity” of the data was not established.  
  4) actificats introduced by the "normalization" mentioned below.

The Gravity features are ignored (except as specifically noted). The objective is to provide a tidy data set to underly 
study/test of possible advanced algorithms to quantify user motion/activity from processed accelerometer/gyrmometer sensors. 
To this end the Gravity features are:
  1) Not interesting, the Body features are the target.
  2) In any algorithm application the gravity signal would be removed and discared in pre-processing.
  3) AN EXCEPTION - the mean gravity signal is retained as this is needed to put the Body vector components into directional context.  

The tidy feature set includes measures labeled with ‘jerk’ but no definition is given by the authors.
  Jerk is taken in the classical physics sense of being the time-derivative of a quantity.

The tidy feature set includes items labeled with 'mag' but no definition is given by the authors. 
  Mag is taken to mean 'magnitude' in the classical physics sense of being the vector-magnitude.  
  Hopefully as taken on the time-series data and not as taken on the feature values, but this is not specified by the authors 

Interpretation of the meaning of authors feature labels:
The feature label 'tBodyAcc-mean()-X' is taken to be the mean time-domain body acceleration 
  from the x-directed accelerometer. 
The feature label 'tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X' is taken to be the mean time-domain time-derivative  
  of body acceleration from the x-directed accelerometer. 
The feature label 'tBodyAccMag-mean()' is taken to be the mean time-domain magnitude of
  the body acceleration vector (i.e. magnitude as in self-dot-product ). 
The feature labels contianing 'gyro' refer to gyrometer signal measure of angular velocity.
The feature labels contianing 'acc' refer to accelerometer signal measure of acceleration.
The feature labels starting with 'f' and ' t' refer to frequency- and time-domain, respectivly.
The feature lables containing 'gravity' refer to the gravity component detialed above.
The feature lables containing 'body' refer to the gravity component detialed above.
Any feature lable conntaining a duplicate descriptot (e.g. BodyBody) is taken to be a duplication error. 

The specific features included in the tidy data set are:  
     Mean and stdev of BodyAcc, BodyAccJerk, BodyGyro, and BodyGyroJerk for X, Y, Z and magnitude. 
     Mean Gravity components in X, Y, Z and gravity magnitude  

Units: 
1) The authors report the accelerometer data in units of g's and the gyrometer data in units of radians per second. 
2) The authors report "Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1]"
3) An assumption might be that the Acc-features are normalized by g, that Gyro-feaures by radians/sec, the jerk features by an added per sec. 
4) The feature data includes negative values of stdev and Mag. Whereas stdev and Mag are positive-true by defintion. This combined with authors note 
about normalization to the range [-1,1] strongly suggest that the data have been "rescaled" (e.g. substract minimum from data and divide by the span) so 
that any units and interelation between features as reported are not meaningful.  Units therefore are most likely "dimensionless" and not-physical. 

Output:
Output to local directory file -- fresult.txt   (sorted in order of the 30 subjects, 6 activites each)
Suggested function for reading -- data<-read.table("fresult.txt",header=T)

 

